# Syllabus: Category Theory Study Group, Winter 2020


This study group meets twice a week for 6 weeks for two hours each from 
**Feb 5 - March 27, 2020** to study 
[Programming with Categories](https://youtu.be/NUBEB9QlNCM)
with Brendon Fong, David Spivak and Bartosz Milewski. The original course runs 

## Calendar

Day | Date | Videos | Notes
----|----|----|----
0 |  1/5/20 | [Programming with Categories 0](https://youtu.be/NUBEB9QlNCM) | prelims
1 |  1/5/20 | [Programming with Categories Theory 1](https://youtu.be/3W0h3WzxgIE) | David Spivak presents a naive form of set upon which category theory is based.  We do not use [Zermelo Fraenkel set theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo%E2%80%93Fraenkel_set_theory). Instead, think of a set as a sack of dots where you can uniquely identify one dot from all others. [Isomorphism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isomorphism) is more important than set equality. Functions are rules for assigning values of one set to another. How many functions are there from the set with 2 elements to the set of 3 elements? Ans: each one in a picks one of 3 in b. Three picks per element in a multiplied by the number of elements in b. 3x3 = 9. Here is answer in a 3x3 grid: (11, 12, 13; 21, 22, 33; 13, 23, 33). Generally n^m  ("from to the to"). Composition: "g composed with f" same as "g circ f" same as "g(f(x))". Identity functions are like zero in Integers. Definition of [Isomorphism](https://youtu.be/3W0h3WzxgIE?t=30m36s). The [defintion of a category](https://youtu.be/3W0h3WzxgIE?t=36m10s) 1) set of elements called objects, 2) for objects c and d in Cat(c,d) there is a set of morphisms from c to d. Aside: in the category of sets, the objects are sets and the morphisms are functions. The set of all morphisms from c to d is the Hom set, H(c,d), ie, the set of ALL functions from set c to set d. 3) For each object (set) in C, there is a chosen morphism (function in cat of sets) there is an identity function in set Cat(c,c). id_c: c -> c. 4) For any object c,d,e and morphisms f:c->d, g:d->e, there is a chosen morphism, g circ f is a function mapping c -> e. In summary, 1) What are the Objects? 2) What are the Morphisms? 3) What are the Identites and 4) How do you compose? Someone gives you a category, you can check them on two rules, a) Unitality which says id_a circ f is same as f circ id_a. and b) Associativity which basically means paraentesis do not matter. Ends with an example of monoid which is a category with a single object which brings rise to a convenient HomSet(a,a) which is the collection of identity morphisms, each labeled with an interger such that 7 followed by 14 composes to yield 21. And thus the morphisms are isomorphic to the natural numbers N.
2 | 1/9/20 | Brendan Fong presents three types of categories as 1) shapes, 2) ordered things (pre-orders) and 3) monoids. 1) [SHAPES](https://youtu.be/jm3bJrULMqM?t=5m32s): "one" bag of one can be a selector, "pair" two elements no arrows besides the 2 identity arrows. "arrow" consists of two elements and one arrow. and "isomorphism" with composition yielding unity. 2) [PREORDERS](): Consider objects the Integers and function as "is a factor of". Second preorder example where Objects are Typeclasses and function is "is a subclass". Example from Haskell, Functor-> Applicative -> Monad.  A Comonad is also a type of functor. The PREORDER class of categories where the arrow structure is very simple. In contrast 3) MONOIDS are a class of category where the objects are very simple. They are the categories of one object. Consider the arrows being the natural numbers N. Then you can form different categories by choice of composition rule, e.g. +,x, max(), and a rubix cube- its a single object with composabled rotations.II. Thinking categorically.. a category is darts and arrows with composition. Categories are about relations. Consider fixed category C, a generalized element of X of shape A is an arrow A -> X. DUALITY: instead of probing, let's look at shadows coming out. ISOMORPHISM: isomorphic objects are the same. III. HASKELL. Based on lambda calculus. Everytyhing is a function. let lambda = \. Then \ x x B = B since \ x(B) = \B =B.  Indenty in Haskell id= \x -> x. square = \x -> x^2. Same as id x = x (can drop \ on left).

